---
layout     : post
title      : "Your Head Is Older Than Your Feet"
tags       : [einstein, feynman, wineland, rovelli]
categories : [physics, relativity, time, philosophy]
excerpt    : A memorable way to understand Einstein's relativity.
---

**Contents**
1. ToC will be auto-placed here
{:toc}


## Einstein's relativity

The title of this post sounds like clickbait, but it is a fact due to
Einstein's relativity that says time slows down when in motion and when deeper
in a gravitational field. Both of these time dilation effects are infinitesimal
for human reflexes. For example, two clocks separated by one metre vertically
in the earth's gravitational field runs at different rates by about one part in
$$10^{-16}$$. The lower clock runs slower by that margin; or conversely, the
higher clock runs faster by that margin.

This means that for my height of 1.7 metres, time at the top of my head is
gaining about $$1.7 \times 10^{-16}$$ seconds over time at the bottom of my
feet, each and every second. I've been alive for about one billion seconds
(i.e., $$10^9$$ seconds). Assuming a third of my lifetime is spent sleeping in
a horizontal position, where time in my entire body flows at the same rate, my
head is older than my feet by about $$ (1.7 \times 10^{-16}) \times
(\frac{2}{3} \times 10^9) \approx 1 \times 10^{-7}$$ seconds, or 100
nanoseconds. I find that a rather poetic thought.


## Feynman's lecture

The equation for my rough calculations above came from the legendary Richard
Feynman's lecture titled [*Curved Space*][feynmanlink]. He explains the curved
geometry of space-time in a clever way by imagining a bug walking on the 2D
surface of various geometric objects. He derives a simple equation (number 42.6
in the linked site) that I'll reproduce below in verbose form.

$$ \begin{equation}
\frac{\text{time at your feet}}{\text{time at your head}} =
\frac{\text{gravity} \times \text{height}}{\text{lightspeed}^2} + 1
\end{equation}
$$

Gravity and lightspeed are well known constants, while the $$+1$$ at the end
indicates that time at your feet is slower than time at your head. So the
fraction on the right-hand side is what matters really, and that's the clock
drift of one part in $$10^{-16}$$ per metre of height that I mentioned earlier.

[feynmanlink]: http://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/II_42.html


## Centre of the Earth

Time dilation applies to planets and stars of course. I came across an
interesting 2016 paper from the European Journal of Physics, titled [*The young
centre of the Earth*][doi]. The authors show simple calculations for the Earth
and the Sun, whereby their centres are younger than their surfaces by 2.5 years
and 39,000 years respectively. Perhaps this is even more poetic than the
thought of my feet being younger than my head. Now try to imagine time at the
centre of a black hole versus its event horizon!

[doi]: http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0143-0807/37/3/035602/meta


## Accurate clocks

David Wineland shared the 2012 Nobel Prize in Physics after having developed
incredibly accurate clocks for more than three decades. His group published
some neat results in a 2010 paper in the journal Science, titled [*Optical
Clocks and Relativity*][winelandlink]. Using clocks that can keep time to a
resolution smaller than $$10^{-17}$$ seconds, they measured the relativistic
time dilation due to uniform motion and gravitational potential. I also
strongly recommend the following lecture by Winleand from late 2017.

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/AHcOJLvpFYI?rel=0" frameborder="0"
allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[winelandlink]: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/329/5999/1630


## Is time an illusion?

Since Einstein made time slippery in two important ways, coupled with the
time-invariant nature of the laws of physics, it's worth pondering whether time
is an illusion or not. My suspicions are that it indeed is, and I'm not alone
in thinking that way.  Carlo Rovelli is definitely a poet, as much as a
physicist. I have yet to read his latest book *Order of Time*. But his lecture
at The Royal Institution below is thoroughly enlightening, just as his previous
books were. He reminds people at one point that "your head is older than your
feet". Go figure!

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/-6rWqJhDv7M?rel=0" frameborder="0"
allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
