---
layout     : post
title      : "My Business Canon"
tags       : [business, books, christensen, ries, thiel]
excerpt    : Books that have shaped my thinking about business.
---

**Contents**
1. ToC will be auto-placed here
{:toc}


I've previously written about [my uncertainty canon][ucanon], as in books that
have shaped my thinking on the topic of uncertainty. That was largely a list of
psychology books, because I found that subject to provide the best insights
regarding uncertainty (second ranked subject was statistics). A straightforward
next step is to think about the uncertain world of business, investment,
strategy, markets, and so on. Unfortunately, I fooled myself into reading too
many books from that humongous genre called "business", the vast majority of
which was useless at best, and utterly untrue at worst.  Nevertheless, I've
settled on three books that taught me a trinity of truths. I have come across
nothing that surpasses the insights from these books, nor invalidates their
assertions. Hence they now constitute my business canon for the sake of
posterity.

[ucanon]: {{ "psychology/philosophy/2018/09/12/my-uncertainty-canon.html" | absolute_url }}

The first book is from 1997, titled *The Innovator's Dilemma*. It's written by
Clayton Christensen, who is a legendary scholar of management theory and
business history from Harvard. The second book is titled *The Lean Startup*,
written by Eric Ries and published in 2011. Ries is an enlightened engineer who
managed to firmly embed the scientific method as bedrock foundation into the
shaky isle of startups, and subsequently restated anew the same trinity of
truths. The final book in my canon is *Zero to One*, published in 2014 and
written by Peter Thiel with help from Blake Masters, who bring the sharp
utensils of libertarian philosophy to the table, and reach the same trinity of
truths as Christensen and Ries via the contrarian pathway of asking enduring
questions. So, the remainder of this post is a paraphrasing of the trinity that
I've learned from these three books.


## Domination begins with humiliation

Christensen observed across a number of industries (particularly the disk drive
industry) that well managed companies, which were the market leaders,
eventually went bust when the market conditions changed drastically. Moreover,
his finding was that the reason for their going belly up was the abundance, not
absence, of good management! What usually occurs is that well managed companies
become dominant via what he calls *sustaining* technologies or innovations that
lead to incremental market gain and temporary leadership. But then a
*disruptive* technology or innovation (his famous phrase) comes along from the
low-end of the market, or from a new market with tiny overlap with the
incumbents' segment, which blindsides these well managed companies. Their fate
then becomes a question of either evolution or extinction, depending on what
they decide to do next. He observed that well managed companies typically
decided to go extinct unwittingly, that is, they could not bring themselves to
evolve sufficiently for survival in a changed marketplace.

How does something like this transpire? A good answer is provided by
Christensen in the book, which is that it's pretty much impossible for any
existing market leader to adapt using old school ideas of good management, due
to the fact that a disruptive technology invalidates old metrics and
methods. So his prescription is to dream big but start small. And for large
incumbents in a market, he recommends the decision that has now become standard
practice: spin off a new company to nimbly navigate a small, risky, emerging
market. There is, of course, quite a bit more subtlety to what he says in the
book. I'm only summarising the main idea behind this truth that market
*domination begins with humiliation*, both in terms of a large firm falling
over and a small startup slowly learning the ropes - because disruption is
initially humiliating. The implication is that starting small and evolving
endlessly is the key to not just surviving, but thriving as well.

Ries arrives at this truth from an engineering perspective of building
products. He proposes the *build-measure-learn* feedback loop in a startup for
navigating an emerging or untapped market. Indeed, even for discovering a new
market! The build phase is a *minimum viable product* that enables measuring
relevant new metrics, which subsequently permit learning and either pivoting
from or persevering with the startup's vision plus strategy. His overt emphasis
is on small steps, not giant leaps. The minimum viable product is all about
testing assumptions and feasibility, which is a good way of rephrasing the old
engineering advice to prototype first and prove a concept at a small
scale. It's rather shocking how many startups waste money in the 21st century
just because they can, sigh. Ries ends the book with a rallying cry to "waste
not". I certainly agree. And the fact that humility is a viable pathway to
future invincibility is underrated as a strategy, particularly in
marketing. The macho approach of most startups is to conquer unclaimed markets
and forcefully colonise them. These organisations sacrifice hordes of cash in
the process, along with the time and energy of their employees. This is a
hugely wasteful approach. The refined method of build-measure-learn feedback
loop provides a vastly more efficient route to market domination.

Ultimately, this feedback loop requires the courage to release an awful
prototype into an unknown marketplace. This is overwhelmingly likely to lead to
humiliation, bad press in most cases, and perhaps the wrath of social media
monsters. However, this is an extremely brief pain in the 21st century, because
news cycles are so fast and people have such short attention spans. Thus, the
main point of what Ries says in the book about a minimum viable product is to
understand that a good amount of courage and humility is needed to succeed by
iterating through his build-measure-learn feedback loop. Once again, market
domination awaits those who dare to be humiliated first. Now, of course there
are plenty of tactics for dulling the pain of humiliation, which Ries explains
in the book. But the key is that one must acknowledge the overwhelming
probability of humiliation in order to become comfortable with its
consequences. Ignorance may be bliss, but it also kills!

How does Thiel's book arrive at this truth? He takes a counter-intuitive route
through monopolisation. His assertion is that perpetual competition between
firms leads to ever decreasing profit margins for all, so much so that in a
perfectly competitive marketplace (which is a rather hypothetical scenario, if
ever there was one) all profits eventually shrink to zero. He insists,
therefore, that a company must start with a monopoly (or near-monopoly) share
of a small market (either new or emerging), then defend that share while
growing the overall market size en route to domination. Regardless of whether
one agrees or not with his implied promotion of monopolistic and
anti-competitive marketplaces, the final prescription is identical to what
Christensen and Ries have articulated previously - dream big but start
small. In essence, all three authors are promoting monopolistic behaviour,
because that's what market domination is, at the end of the day. Hence I find
that Thiel's explicitness is the best aphoristic style, and thus my phrasing of
this truth is in terms of *domination* and *humiliation*.


## Learning comes from risking

If domination is the end, and humiliation is the beginning, then how does one
go about charting a course from the latter to the former? The answer is that
there's no map, no beaten track, no light at the end of the tunnel, and
absolutely no plug-n-play formula for this challenge. Therefore, one has to
take risks and learn from the outcomes, so as to carve out a brand new
path. It's a rather obvious thing to say, not really profound at all. But this
truth holds a profound implication when it comes to risk-taking in the real
world - uncertainty is unknowable, the best we can do is to learn by taking
small risks (so that we don't go extinct), and keep repeating the process at an
accelerating rate towards our growth target. All three authors hammer away at
this notion of uncertainty and learning from their respective vantage points.

Christensen makes the case that well managed companies have a good chance to
cope with disruptive innovations by creating a very different culture of
learning, where the focus is on experimentation and nimble decision making at a
small scale. It requires acknowledging that a new or emerging market is
unknowable via the traditional methods of focus groups and market
research. Those tricks work beautifully for existing, well defined, and highly
exploitable markets. They do not work for a market that is invisible, or merely
emerging on the horizon. The major consequence of this is that conventional
accounting measures are hopeless in such an uncertain scenario. It's fruitless
to calculate any kind of growth projection and discounted cashflow when nobody
actually knows just how big a market there is to exploit. Of course that would
change *after* one has learned by taking small risks, so that all the
conventional wisdom of good management and accounting would become rightly
applicable. His point is that it's imperative to understand that the effect
comes after its cause - thus small risks lead to learning the cause(s) first.

Ries borrows from the scientific vocabulary to restate this truth in more
familiar terms. For him, decision making in a startup is akin to hypothesis
testing in science. The challenge is to state assumptions precisely so that
they can be falsified by experiments. If assumptions withstand these tests then
they can be treated as reliable foundation for further decision making in a
repeat of the scientific method. This is really hard for individuals (if it
were easy then we would all be brilliant scientists).  So much of our
psychology has evolved to be totally unscientific that it takes a lot of
training, practice, honesty and integrity to obtain a scientific mindset. What
Ries says in his book is again echoing Christensen regarding the fact that
learning is the goal of risk taking. In fact, I see it as a causal
relationship, in that *learning comes from risking*. It's an instructive way of
looking at science as well, since scientists are really taking fundamental
risks in order to learn a great deal about the world.

What value is there in learning from taking risks? It's a question that hints
at the possibility of a market which actually attaches some kind of tangible
(though not necessarily monetary) value to learning by way of risking. Thiel's
book arrives at this point along a curious tangent. He ponders the value of
secrecy in terms of knowing something that others do not, as yet, know. Indeed,
as he argues, the point of a startup is to capitalise on something secret. The
nuance here is that "secret" means merely unnoticed by the rest of humanity but
fully noticed by the startup's founder(s) - which basically makes it no secret
at all!  The way I see it, he is articulating a long-winded version of the goal
to learn by taking risks. He's inherently taking for granted the fact that the
founder(s) of a startup previously learned something that could be
exploited. But the learning comes first, exploitation second. As a result, the
value of learning lies in how the resulting knowledge can be exploited, whether
for capital gains (as in a startup), or for social gains (as in a charity), or
for epistemological gains (as in science). In that sense, I can't fault Thiel's
reasoning and circuitous arrival at this truth, i.e., learning comes from
risking.


## Strength also defines weakness

The last of the trinity is a truth about *asymmetry*. Christensen explains it
best, which is that the capabilities of an organisation also define its
*disabilities*. He noticed that well managed companies were good at very few
things, which they had progressively learned over time. So when they found
themselves needing to be good at very *new* things altogether, they necessarily
struggled, and most often they went bankrupt. He discusses various dynamics at
play that bring about such a situation. The main point is that companies tend
to specialise by moving towards the high-end of their favoured markets, which
necessarily includes focusing on higher profit margins and accepting the
underlying higher cost structures. Then, when disruptive innovators undercut
and precipitously subsume the previously high-end markets, these well managed
companies almost always become extinct.

Ries provides an insightful method of countering the tide of moving upmarket
and specialising until extinction. He calls it *pivot or persevere*
milestones. The basic idea is that at the end of each iteration through his
build-measure-learn feedback loop, a startup has to decide whether it is going
to persevere with current vision/strategy or pivot to something new and
different. So he's putting this stark choice at the centre of the picture for a
startup, because the lesson from business history, which Christensen uncovered,
is that pivoting is almost always overlooked by established incumbents in a
market before going bust. Pivoting, as Ries articulates in the book, is a very
difficult thing to pull off initially, for all sorts of cultural and
psychological reasons. But it can be learned, and he shares many stories in the
book where startups managed to successfully pivot many times. The essential
truth that they all acknowledged was the fact that they learned to define their
weaknesses by their strengths. It's the clarity in mapping out one's
capabilities *and* disabilities that really helps to overcome all manner of
biases against evidence-based decision making.

And finally, to round out this truth, Thiel asks a foresighted question: can
the current market position be defended a decade or two from now? As hard as
the future is to guesstimate, it's still worth pondering his question because
it necessarily focuses on the weaknesses that everyone tends to overlook. What
he's getting at by this question is the same pattern that Christensen observed
in various industries, and it is the same argument that Ries is making in
favour of quickly pivoting when the evidence points towards extinction.
Furthermore, Thiel extends this with an insight about the valuation of a
startup, which is that the vast majority of a startup's profits is assumed to
materialise many years into the future. Therefore, any growth strategy ought to
worry a great deal about whether or not the current market will provably
disappear in the future. For instance, any business built on exploiting very
limited earthly resources will suffer when those resources are depleted - just
a matter of when, not if. So it doesn't make sense to invest in such businesses
for the long run. Consequently, the short-term strengths of these businesses
also define their long-term weaknesses.
